GWEN IFILL: Good evening. I'm
Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
tonight: candidates'
last pitches to voters before
Super Tuesday.
We talk with Amy Walter and
Tamara Keith about
what's at stake.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also ahead:
Moderates and reformists
score big wins in Iran's
elections, raising
questions about what change is
possible under
a powerful hard-line leadership.
GWEN IFILL: And "Spotlight" wins
the top prize
at the Oscars. We examine the
state of today's
investigative journalism.
MARTY BARON, Executive Editor,
The Washington
Post: Clearly, it's going to be
more difficult,
given that there are fewer
resources to do
it. This is very expensive work
to do. And
yet we have to commit ourselves
to doing it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: It was
no-holds-barred on the
presidential campaign today,
underscoring
the all-important races on tap
tomorrow, Super
Tuesday.
And, as tensions flared, the
Republican race
was thrown into uproar again.
This is Donald Trump, barreling
toward tomorrow's
big voting day with the wind at
his back in
almost all 13 of the Super
Tuesday states.
Today, in Southwestern Virginia,
the Republican
front-runner boasted his
campaign is on a
nonstop roll.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
Republicans have a hard time,
because, structurally,
you have to win Pennsylvania,
you have to
win Ohio, you have to -- you
know, they have
like a map of in particular six
states. And
you lose one, it's over. The
Democratic ride
is a much easier ride.
But if I pick up New York, or if
I pick up
Michigan, it's over, folks. It's
over. It's
over.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
GWEN IFILL: But his speech was
interrupted
today by protesters representing
the Black
Lives Matter movement.
DONALD TRUMP: Get them out of
here, please.
All right, folks, you're going
to hear it
once. All lives matter.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
GWEN IFILL: Party leaders
denounced his refusal
yesterday to reject support from
white supremacist
groups, including the KKK and
David Duke.
DONALD TRUMP: Well, just so you
understand,
I don't know anything about
David Duke. OK?
I don't know anything about what
you're even
talking about with white
supremacy or white
supremacists.
GWEN IFILL: In a tweet, the
Republicans' last
presidential nominee, Mitt
Romney, called
Trump's words -- quote -- "a
disqualifying
and disgusting response."
While Donald Trump traveled in
Virginia, which
has 49 delegates at stake,
Florida Senator
Marco Rubio cast a wider net for
the 174 delegates
up for grabs in Tennessee,
Georgia and Arkansas.
Rubio, in a stop in Atlanta,
also knocked
Trump for his comments
yesterday.
SEN. MARCO RUBIO (R-FL),
Presidential Candidate:
Honestly, you know our country,
you know your
neighbors, you know your family
and you know
your friends. Do you really
believe that those
-- that they're going to vote
for someone
who refuses to disavow the Ku
Klux Klan?
MAN: No.
SEN. MARCO RUBIO: Do you think
they're going
to vote for someone with a
record like his?
AUDIENCE: No!
SEN. MARCO RUBIO: They're not.
That means
we're going to lose. That means
the winner
of this election will be Hillary
Clinton.
AUDIENCE: No!
GWEN IFILL: And Ted Cruz, who
spent today
in his home state of Texas,
piled on as well.
With 155 delegates at stake
there, the Lone
Star State is Super Tuesday's
biggest prize.
Cruz took aim at the practices
of a Trump-owned
club in Florida, one that he
said turned aside
American workers looking for
jobs.
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TX),
Presidential Candidate:
Now, listen, that's not a whole
lot different,
what Donald's doing, than a
whole lot of other
big companies. But you don't get
to abuse
and take advantage of American
workers, and
then suddenly style yourself a
champion for
American workers.
GWEN IFILL: The heated
Republican rhetoric
became the focus today on the
Democratic campaign
trail as well. Hillary Clinton,
fresh off
her nearly 50-point victory in
South Carolina,
weighed in this morning from
Massachusetts.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
What we need to do now is make
America whole,
working together, rejecting the
mean-spiritedness,
the hateful rhetoric, the
insults. That's
not who we are.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
GWEN IFILL: And Bernie Sanders,
in Minneapolis,
spent more time taking on Trump
than he did
Clinton.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate:
We will defeat Mr. Trump,
because the American
people believe that community,
working together
trumps selfishness.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS: And, most
importantly,
we will defeat Mr. Trump because
the American
people understand, and always
have, that love
trumps hatred.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
GWEN IFILL: Tomorrow is likely
to provide
a definitive turning point for
both parties.
We will take a thorough look at
the Republican
and Democratic races after the
news summary.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the day's
other news, the
United States secretary-general
pronounced
the three-day-old truce in Syria
is holding,
by and large. But Syrian
government forces
continued airstrikes in Hama and
ground assaults
near Aleppo and elsewhere.
And the main opposition group
warned, the
U.S. and U.N. have to intervene.
SALIM AL-MUSLAT, High
Negotiations Committee:
Are they aware of the violations
there? I
believe there has to be a
mechanism to really
stop this violation on the
ground for -- to
encourage others to go and sit
on the table
and negotiate.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Washington,
the White House
said it's too early to assign
blame for the
truce violations.
GWEN IFILL: In Iraq, Shiites
were hit hard
again by a suicide bombing that
killed at
least 40 people northeast of
Baghdad. Meanwhile,
the death toll rose to 73 after
Sunday's twin
suicide bombings in the Iraqi
capital. Islamic
State militants claimed
responsibility for
that attack.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Anger boiled over
today among
Iraqi and Syrian refugees
stranded at Greece's
northern border with Macedonia.
They have
run into restrictions as they
try to head
deeper into Europe.
Geraint Vincent of Independent
Television
News reports.
GERAINT VINCENT: In the
footsteps of thousands
who came before them, the people
followed
the railway line north towards
the border,
but this morning, the path was
blocked. Young
men at the front of the crowd
demanded access.
It wasn't given. So they decided
to gain it
themselves.
Battering rams were created out
of what they
found along the way. When the
signposts didn't
work, they got hold of something
bigger. The
gate was forced open and the
crowd came face
to face with the police line.
With the stones
bouncing off their riot shields,
the police
decide to respond with tear gas.
One officer steps forward and
fires the first
canister straight into the
crowd. It falls
back, but the man in the blue
hooded top is
undeterred. The next canister
hits him in
the chest. The police followed
up the tear
gas with stun grenades. Now the
crowd can't
move back quickly enough.
Behind the young men at the
front, there were
families and children, their
rucksacks packed
for the journey north. Now
they're just trying
to escape the gas which is
stinging their
eyes and burning their throats.
So, it's back
to where they began this
morning, a transit
camp meant for 2,000 people
which is now home
to 10,000.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Across Europe,
fire broke out
as crews began dismantling a
huge migrant
camp in Calais, France.
Activists fought with
police at the site, where some
4,000 people
had been living.
GWEN IFILL: Back in this
country, at the Supreme
Court, Justice Clarence Thomas
did something
he had not done in 10 years of
oral arguments:
He spoke. He asked a string of
questions during
a case about gun rights. It was
the first
time he's participated from the
bench since
February 22, 2006.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Across the city
of Washington,
at the White House, a solemn
ceremony today
to honor U.S. Navy SEAL Edward
Byers. He was
presented with the nation's
highest military
decoration.
It's been some 40 years since a
president
bestowed the Medal of Honor on a
living active-duty
member of the U.S. Navy, and
only five other
SEALs have received one.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
Today's ceremony is truly
unique: a rare opportunity
for the American people to get a
glimpse of
a special breed of warrior that
so often serves
in the shadows.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Edward Byers was
a senior chief
special warfare operator on the
elite SEAL
Team Six that rescued an
American hostage
in Eastern Afghanistan in
December 2012. Dr.
Dilip Joseph had been working
for an aid organization
when the Taliban kidnapped him.
BARACK OBAMA: Our SEALs rushed
to the doorway,
which was covered by a layer of
blankets.
Ed started ripping them down,
exposing himself
to enemy fire. A teammate, the
lead assaulter,
pushed in and was hit. Fully
aware of the
danger, Ed moved in next. An
enemy guard aimed
his rifle right at him. Ed
fired.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That first SEAL,
Petty Officer
1st Class Nicolas Checque, died
of his wounds,
but Byers saved Dr. Joseph.
BARACK OBAMA: Ed leapt across
the room and
threw himself on the hostage,
using his own
body to shield him from the
bullets. Another
enemy fighter appeared, and with
his body,
Ed kept shielding the hostage.
With his bare
hands, Ed pinned the fighter to
the wall and
held him until his teammates
took action.
JUDY WOODRUFF: After today's
ceremony, however,
outside the White House, Byers
said the real
credit goes to his comrades.
SR. CHIEF EDWARD BYERS, Medal of
Honor Recipient:
If it wasn't for that team, I
wouldn't be
standing here today.
Specifically, for me,
my teammate, friend, and brother
Nic Checque,
the award is truly his.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, Byers says,
he bears the
responsibility to live up to the
sacrifice
that Checque and others made.
SR. CHIEF EDWARD BYERS: I don't
know for sure
how this will change my life.
And I just plan
on taking it one step at a time.
I'm going
to continue doing my job in the
Navy, continue
being a SEAL, and doing the
thing I loved
ever since I was a child.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Byers joined the
Navy in 1998
and has served nine combat
tours.
GWEN IFILL: And on Wall Street,
late selling
wiped out a month's worth of
gains. The Dow
Jones industrial average lost
123 points to
close at 16516. The Nasdaq fell
32 points,
and the S&P 500 slid nearly 16.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Still to come on
the "NewsHour":
Super Tuesday and the battles to
unseat the
presidential front-runners; a
major election
victory for moderates in Iran;
hackers that
hold your data for ransom; and
much more.
GWEN IFILL: With the candidates
busy on the
trail today, it's time for
Politics Monday,
with Amy Walter of The Cook
Political Report
joining us from Florida tonight,
and Tamara
Keith of NPR, who is covering a
Hillary Clinton
event in Northern Virginia.
Welcome to you both out there on
the road.
I want to start by reading in
full this Mitt
Romney tweet that he sent out
today, pretty
tough words against the likely
-- what is
increasingly looking like the
party nominee,
Donald Trump.
He wrote: "It's a disqualifying
and disgusting
response by @realDonaldTrump" --
that his
handle, of course -- "to the
KKK. His coddling
of repugnant bigotry is not in
the character
of America."
Now, Mitt Romney has been
stepping up his
attacks on Donald Trump during
the last week
or so, but it feels like this is
another turning
point. But then, whenever we
approach a turning
point, Amy, we then pass it and
go somewhere
else. Is this different?
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: It
feels like we're still where we
have always
been, Gwen, which is a lot of
people wringing
their hands, talking about how
much they dislike
Donald Trump or disavow his
comments or statements,
and yet they don't rally behind
the alternative
to Donald Trump.
And so Donald Trump continues to
benefit from
the fact that the field remains
fractured.
There's no consensus right now
about who the
candidate to take on Donald
Trump will be.
Marco Rubio thinks it's him. Ted
Cruz thinks
it's him. And John Kasich still
thinks that
he can wait until March 15 and
Ohio, and it
will be him.
GWEN IFILL: Well, Tam, I think
that Amy just
nailed it, which is that she
said that people
are not rallying around the
alternative. Maybe
it's because there are so many
alternatives.
How would you characterize the
depth of Republican
worry about the state of affairs
right now?
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: Well,
I mean, I think you can see the
depth of worry
in that Mitt Romney has come
back to the surface
and he's tweeting.
And, you know, there's even a
little Mitt
Romney buzz out there, which is
a sign of
the worry that's out there. You
also have
-- it's an interesting mix. You
have some
members of Congress -- or at
least one senator
saying he's not going to vote
for Donald Trump
no matter what.
And there's sort of a growing
chorus of that,
at the same time that Donald
Trump is gaining
some endorsements, including
from Senator
Sessions of Alabama and Chris
Christie of
New Jersey.
GWEN IFILL: You were talking, of
course, referring
to the senator from Nebraska --
at least,
Amy, she was -- who said that if
it was a
choice between Hillary Clinton
and Donald
Trump, he would vote for
neither.
Does that leave a path at all
for Ted Cruz
or Marco Rubio?
AMY WALTER: Tuesday is going to
be very interesting
for both of these candidates.
Look, Ted Cruz has the most to
lose here.
He was banking his entire
strategy on the
South. He obviously came up
short in South
Carolina, very far short. He's
hoping for
a big win in Texas, but even
that is not enough.
He's also has to do -- he also
has to do well
in a lot of these Southern
states that are
heavily evangelical.
But from the polling that I have
seen right
now, the problem for Ted Cruz is
the same
problem he had in South
Carolina, which is
evangelicals remain divided,
Donald Trump
gaining somewhere around 33, 35
percent of
that vote. What this means is
Ted Cruz comes
out of March 1, instead of with
a head of
steam, he's in deficit with
delegates.
Rubio is in a different camp
here. And he
has a different strategy. March
1 isn't as
important to him. These are not
the states
that he needs to do as well in,
was never
expected to do as well in. He
needs to wrap
up some delegates, though. His
play is really
March 15, once we start getting
into the winner-take-all
states, places like Florida here
and Ohio.
He has to win those in order to
be relevant.
But, really, at the bottom line,
Gwen, we're
to a place right now where
Donald Trump is
the presumptive nominee, unless
or until one
person can be the alternative,
or we get to
a place where the vote continues
to be divided,
where delegates continue to be
divided, and
we end up with no candidate
getting 50 percent
of the vote.
And this is actually looking
like the only
or best-case scenario for people
who don't
want Donald Trump.
GWEN IFILL: Tam, it's really
interesting to
me to see that the endorsements
that Donald
Trump has gotten recently, Jeff
Sessions,
very conservative, Mitt -- I
mean, Chris Christie,
not, that they would both be
gathering around
him. Is that just a -- is that a
floodgate
about to open?
TAMARA KEITH: Yes, this is an
interesting
thing.
It's not clear what the
endorsements for Donald
Trump actually mean. He's this
unconventional
candidate who, it would seem,
doesn't even
really need endorsements, but
then these endorsements
do lend a little legitimacy.
They lend some
credibility to this outsider
candidacy.
GWEN IFILL: Tam, I want to stick
with you
for a moment, because people
would think,
to hear us talk, that we're only
talking about
the Republicans.
You're clearly at a Hillary
Clinton event.
And -- but if you listen to
Hillary Clinton
and to Bernie Sanders, they also
are talking
about the Republicans.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes, absolutely.
Hillary Clinton is doing it in
more of a veiled
way. You can almost say that
Hillary Clinton
is trying to take something of a
high road,
but she's talking about the need
for love
and kindness, and then sort of
showing distress
about the discourse on the
Republican side.
She says she wants to take them
on.
Bernie Sanders is also being
very critical
of Donald Trump especially. He
sent out a
tweet yesterday about the KKK
stuff, and it
was very critical. And,
interestingly, Hillary
Clinton's account then retweeted
that.
GWEN IFILL: Has that ever
happened before,
where Hillary Clinton endorsed
anything Bernie
Sanders said?
(LAUGHTER)
TAMARA KEITH: Yes, you know,
they often talk
about their distinguished
opponent.
But this is definitely an
interesting situation
to have her campaign retweeting
his campaign.
GWEN IFILL: Having a common
enemy is always
handy.
Amy, which party, if we were
going to say
that -- last week, obviously,
Hillary Clinton
dealt a pretty big blow to
Bernie Sanders.
They're still fighting each
other, dealing
daily kind of juvenile blows on
the Republican
side. Which party is having the
more consequential
civil war at this point?
AMY WALTER: Well, it absolutely
is the Republicans.
Listen, I feel like this is a
party right
now -- I mean, I can almost hear
the tectonic
shift here. The Republican Party
now is on
the verge of absolutely
splitting apart. And
you asked about what the level
of worry is
among sort of Republican
establishment, as
they said on "Spinal Tap," this
goes to 11.
OK? It is off the charts.
And I think we are going to see
a Republican
Party that looks, if Donald
Trump is the nominee,
that looks very different than a
Republican
Party we have seen before. I
don't doubt that
we will see a Republican
candidate running
as a third party. This is not
about -- I know
we have talked about Michael
Bloomberg in
the past. I'm talking
specifically about a
traditional Republican
establishment conservative
figure running as a third-party
candidate.
Wouldn't be surprised about that
at all.
The civil war has been a big
part of the Republican
identity for some time. These
factions have
been fighting each other for
some time. The
only thing that has kept these
factions from
splitting apart in the past has
been the fact
that Republicans are united in
their dislike
for President Obama.
But now that the focus is
inward, instead
of outward, the civil war has --
is starting
to take a serious toll. And I
really think
we're going to see in some way,
shape or form
a dissolution of the Republican
Party as it
currently stands.
GWEN IFILL: Wow, that's saying
something.
And it is interesting. We don't
hear President
Obama's name nearly as much
anymore. And it
used to be the common rallying
cry.
Amy Walter of The Cook Political
Report, Tamara
Keith of NPR, thank you both.
Amy Walter of The Cook Political
Report, Tamara
Keith of NPR, thank you both.
The results are in from Iran's
elections.
They show strong gains for
relatively moderate
allies of President Hassan
Rouhani and a setback
for more hard-line elements in
Iran's conservative
Islamic establishment.
It's the first national
elections since last
summer's nuclear deal. There was
heavy turnout
Friday, as Iranians elected a
new Parliament
and the so-called Assembly of
Experts, a council
of senior clerics that is tasked
with selecting
the supreme leader.
The man currently in that
office, Ayatollah
Ali Khamenei, praised the high
turnout and
advised the newly elected bodies
to guard
against Western influence. He
remains the
decisive voice in Iran.
So, what does this all mean
inside Iran, and
for the u.s? We turn to Karim
Sadjadpour of
the Carnegie Endowment for
International Peace.
Karim, welcome back to the
program.
So, how do you read these
results?
KARIM SADJADPOUR, Carnegie
Endowment For International
Peace: Judy, I think this was a
best-case
outcome for President Rouhani.
As you know, many of the
moderates and reformist
candidates were disqualified.
They were prevented
from running. So, before the
elections, it
looked pretty bleak for Rouhani.
But they
managed to come up with a list
-- what they
called the list of hope. And
that list swept
Tehran. It did well in other
urban areas.
It didn't do as well in other --
in the provinces.
But I think that this doesn't
bring about
liberal reformists to the
Iranian Parliament,
but it's certainly a less
hostile, less intolerant
Parliament for President
Rouhani.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, that's my
question, because,
as you said, so many moderates
were not even
allowed to run. So how much more
moderate
are these newly elected members?
KARIM SADJADPOUR: Many of them
are unknown,
Judy.
I spoke to a friend of mine who
has been involved
in Iranian politic for three
decades, and
he said, of the 30 candidates
who won Tehran,
he was only familiar with four
or five names.
Among those 30 candidates, some
of them actually
self-identify as conservatives
as well.
So, I think we should have sober
expectations
about the nature of these
reformist Parliamentarians
and, frankly, the Iranian
Parliament's ability
to wield change. But there's a
great Persian
expression that when someone has
experienced
near death, they're content with
a fever.
And I think that the Iranian
population over
the last decade has really
experienced incredibly
difficult times. And I think
that many people
went to vote, not because they
were hoping
for something. They had great
expectations
of a more liberal Parliament,
but they fear,
if they didn't vote, it would
bring about
a much more intolerant,
hard-line Parliament.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Will anything
change, then?
KARIM SADJADPOUR: I -- I think
that, if you're
sitting at the White House or
you're sitting
at the State Department, this
election is
not likely to change Iran's
policies in Syria,
Iran's objection to Israel,
Iran's animosity
towards the United States. And
it's not likely
to make Iran a tolerant
democratic place.
But if you live in Tehran, if
you learn in
Shiraz, this can moderately
improve your quality
of life. And the Expert Assembly
election
is important as well, because
they theoretically
have responsibility for choosing
the next
supreme leader.
So, Iran's current supreme
leader, Ali Khamenei,
is 76 years old. It could be
that, if he dies
in the next six to eight years,
the Experts
Assembly could have a role
selecting his successor.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, what should
we expect to
see tangibly there? Does this
mean the hard-liners
have somewhat less influence?
KARIM SADJADPOUR: Well, the
supreme leader
and the Revolutionary Guards
remain pretty
firmly entrenched. Iran remains
a police state,
in which, if you're a
journalist, you're an
author, you're a civil society
activist, you
can be plucked off the street,
put in prison
without reason, without
explanation.
There's actually two U.S.
citizens, Siamak
Namazi, and his 80-year-old
father, Baquer
Namazi, that remain in prison in
Iran. So,
we certainly have to be sober
about our expectations.
But I think this, it just goes
to show that
President Rouhani's more
pragmatic agenda
is deeply popular in Iran. And I
think it
really increases the likelihood
that he will
be reelected come next summer.
JUDY WOODRUFF: To what extent,
Karim, was
this a referendum on the nuclear
deal with
the West?
KARIM SADJADPOUR: You know, I
think the nuclear
deal and greater cooperation
with the outside
world, greater integration with
the outside
world, is something which has
long been desired
by the Iranian public.
This is a very young population.
They're really,
I would argue, post-ideological.
But, at the
end of the day, the power in
Iran -- or, I
should say, the power of
institutions in Iran
aren't derived from their
popular support.
They are derived from their
coercive capabilities.
So, I think the nuclear deal was
very popular,
and people would like to have
much more of
that type of detente with the
United States.
But as long as this current
supreme leader
remains in power, I think we
should be realistic
about the likelihood that this
rapprochement
with the United States will
continue.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Karim Sadjadpour,
interpreting
these election results for us,
we thank you.
KARIM SADJADPOUR: Thank you,
Judy.
GWEN IFILL: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
states push back
on transgender rights; the U.S.
role in the
fight against Nigeria's Boko
Haram; and the
Oscars put the spotlight on
investigative
journalism.
But, first, a look at what's
become the latest
threat to our cyber-security.
The problem took on new urgency
recently when
a hospital in Los Angeles had
its entire computer
network, including all its
digital medical
records, locked up by hackers.
They demanded
a ransom before they'd release
the computers.
It was the second such attack
this month.
L.A.'s Health Department was hit
last week.
These types of computer attacks,
which usually
target individual computer
users, are on the
rise.
The "NewsHour"'s William
Brangham reported
on this threat last year, and
now he brings
us an update.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Inna Simone is
retired.
She's a mother and grandmother
from Russia
who now lives outside of Boston.
In the fall
of 2014, her home computer
started acting
strangely.
INNA SIMONE, Retiree: My
computer was working
terribly. It was not working. I
mean, it was
so slow.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: A few days
later, while
searching through her computer
files, Inna
saw dozens of these messages --
they were
all the same. They read: "Your
files are encrypted.
To get the key to decrypt them,
you have to
pay $500."
Her exact deadline, December 2
at 12:48 p.m.,
was just a few days away.
All her files were locked , tax
returns, financial
papers, letters, even the
precious photos
of her granddaughter Zoe. Inna
couldn't open
any of them.
INNA SIMONE: It says, "If you
won't pay, your
fine will double. If you won't
pay by then,
all your files will be deleted
and you will
lose them forever and never will
get back."
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Inna Simone,
like thousands
of others, had been victimized
by what's known
as a ransomware attack. Hackers
-- who law
enforcement believe come mainly
from Eastern
Europe or Russia -- manage to
implant malicious
software onto your computer,
usually when
you mistakenly open an infected
e-mail attachment,
or visit a compromised Web site.
That software then allows the
hackers to lock
up your files, or your entire
computer, until
you pay them a ransom to give it
back.
Justin Cappos is a computer
security expert
at New York University.
JUSTIN CAPPOS, New York
University: It will
actually lock you out of the
files, the data
on your computer.
So, you'd be able to use the
computer but
those files have been encrypted
by the attacker
with a key that only they
possess. It's frustrating
because you know the data is
there. You know
the files are there. You know
your photos
and everything is there and
could be accessible
to you. But you have no way of
being able
to get at it because of this
encryption that
the attackers are using.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: This is
exactly what happened
at Hollywood Presbyterian
Hospital in Los
Angeles. According to officials,
about a month
ago, their computerized medical
records were
locked up by one of these
malicious programs,
and a hacker demanded $17,000 in
ransom to
unlock them.
During this time, medical staff
were forced
to use paper and pen for their
record-keeping,
but they say no patient files
were compromised.
The hospital decided to pay the
ransom. Their
computers were unlocked, and the
FBI is now
investigating.
Inna Simone was facing the same
dilemma, whether
or not to pay the ransom or not.
Computer
technicians were no help. She
didn't want
to call the police. Her husband
at first said
don't pay the ransom, but she
wanted those
files back.
In their ransom note, the
hackers wanted to
be paid in Bitcoin, the largely
untraceable
digital currency, and have it
put into their
anonymous account. Inna had
never heard of
Bitcoin, but the hackers, in one
of their
many touches of what you might
call customer
service, provided all sorts of
helpful facts
and links and how-to guides
about Bitcoin.
Alina Simone is Inna's daughter.
ALINA SIMONE, Daughter of Inna
Simone: If
you see the ransom note, you can
see, oh,
they try to reassure you about
Bitcoin. We
have got screen shots or here is
a link to
some kind of a guide that talks
you through
the whole process, and here's a
list of providers
with a little kind of Yelp-like
reviews next
to each one that kind of
explains their strength
and weaknesses.
It's incredibly sophisticated.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: After days of
debate, Inna
decided to pay. She sent a money
order to
a Bitcoin seller, but it was
Thanksgiving,
and a huge snowstorm hit Boston,
which meant
the check only arrived the
afternoon before
her deadline.
In that delay, Bitcoin's
exchange rate had
changed, and now her money order
didn't cover
the full $500 ransom. It was
about $13 short.
Her last resort using a Bitcoin
ATM machine.
There are hundreds of them in
the U.S., and
one was in Brooklyn, New York,
not far from
her daughter Alina's apartment.
ALINA SIMONE: It's very kind of
spooky looking
ATM. It has no buttons. It just
has a slot
that you feed your money into.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Tuesday
afternoon, the full
ransom was sent to the hackers'
account. But
it was two hours late. Inna
added one short
message to the criminals with
her payment.
INNA SIMONE: I wrote: "I wish
you all will
drop dead."
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The FBI
doesn't have complete
data on how many of these
ransomware attacks
occur every year, but they're
clearly on the
rise.
The anti-virus software firm
Symantec reports
that hundreds of thousands of
these attacks
are launched every month.
There's also a real
difference of opinion on whether
victims should
pay. Security researchers say
paying ransom
only encourages criminals, but
the FBI says
some of this ransomware is so
tough to crack
that paying a few hundred
dollars is sometimes
the only way to get your files
back.
MAN: Our information was held
hostage.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And it's not
just individuals
and hospitals who get hit.
Hackers have hit
several local police stations.
We have heard
of law firms and newsrooms being
targeted.
Even the city of Detroit last
year had its
data held for an $800,000 ransom
by hackers.
The city didn't pay.
NYU computer scientist Justin
Cappos says,
generally speaking, hackers go
after smaller,
individual targets because
they're pretty
easy. Victims often
inadvertently download
the viruses themselves by
clicking on those
e-mail attachments.
Besides, he says, the risks of
getting caught
are low, and if you cast a wide
enough net,
you will get something.
JUSTIN CAPPOS: When you go
fishing, you don't
try to catch every fish in the
ocean. You
only want to catch some. And if
you catch
enough of them, then it's been a
profitable
trip for you.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: When her mom
got hacked,
Alina Simone, who's a journalist
by day, did
some research into ransomware
for a piece
she wrote for The New York
Times. She says
it's alarming how organized and
easy it is
to carry out these kinds of
attacks.
ALINA SIMONE: There are people
making viruses,
selling viruses. There are
distributors whose
specialty is distributing
viruses. These perpetrators,
they don't have to know a line
of code. They
can just buy a virus and then
hire a distributor
and send it out.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Her mom's
story, however,
wasn't over. Inna had paid the
hackers her
$500, but rather than releasing
her files,
as promised, they sent her this
message. It
said: "You didn't pay in time
for decryption."
Remember, she'd paid two hours
late. Now the
hackers doubled the ransom to
$1,000, gave
her another deadline, and said
if she missed
this one, they would delete
everything.
INNA SIMONE: If you won't pay by
then, your
files -- all your files are gone
forever.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Using a
message board the
hackers provided -- another one
of those customer-friendly
touches -- Inna pleaded with the
people she'd
previously told to drop dead:
"We had a snowstorm.
It was a holiday. I am only two
hours' late."
Did this feel strange that
you're trying to
communicate to a group of
criminals -- who
knows where they are in the
world -- saying,
you don't understand, the post
office, the
snow, Thanksgiving, the long
weekend. I mean,
you must've felt...
INNA SIMONE: But what else? This
is the only
option. It's either this or
nothing.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: You didn't
think it would
work.
INNA SIMONE: Absolutely not.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But, later
that day, the
hackers released her files in
full.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
William Brangham.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to a battle
emerging in
some states over schools and
rights for transgender
students.
South Dakota's governor, Dennis
Daugaard,
must decide by tomorrow whether
he will sign
or veto a bill that would make
his state the
first in the country to restrict
transgender
students' access to school
restrooms and locker
rooms. If he doesn't act by
tomorrow, the
bill will become law.
The "NewsHour"'s April Brown
reports for our
American Graduate team.
APRIL BROWN: Transgender rights
advocates
in South Dakota gathered at the
state capitol
building last week to draw
attention to a
bill they consider
discriminatory.
Freshman Nathan Leonard was
there.
NATHAN LEONARD, Student: It
directly affects
me, because I am a transgender
student, and
I already get made fun of
enough.
APRIL BROWN: The bill would
require school
restrooms and locker rooms are
"used only
by students of the same
biological sex." It
would also allow students whose
gender identity
is different than their
biological sex "to
be provided with a reasonable
accommodation."
One of the bill's primary
sponsors, state
Representative Fred Deutsch,
says the goal
is to protect children.
FRED DEUTSCH (R), South Dakota
State Representative:
The bill is not intended to hurt
or harm.
I'm protecting their hearts,
their eyes and
their minds. I don't want our
children to
be exposed to the anatomy of
other genders.
APRIL BROWN: But many in the
LGBT community
and their supporters believe the
bill would
not protect children, especially
transgender
students.
State Representative Paula Hawks
opposes the
bill and stood with protesters.
PAULA HAWKS (D), South Dakota
State Representative:
It is an unfriendly message.
It's hostile.
It's unacceptable in a state
where we're trying
to progress forward.
APRIL BROWN: The battle comes as
a number
of cities have expanded
nondiscrimination
laws for transgender people. But
there are
many other bills many consider
anti-transgender
pending in 16 states, including
Virginia,
Illinois, Indiana, and
Washington state. And
some of them would restrict
students' access
to restrooms and sports
programs.
The South Dakota legislation is
also at odds
with guidance from the U.S.
Department of
Education. Federal officials
have previously
threatened to cut off funding to
districts
in California and Illinois that
didn't allow
transgender students to use
their preferred
bathrooms and changing areas.
However, the Department of
Education guidance
is not legally binding. And if
Governor Dennis
Daugaard signs the bill, there
could be another
repercussion: lawsuits.
FRED DEUTSCH: This is a values
issue. And
if we protect our children and
we get sued,
well, then that's the decision
we make.
APRIL BROWN: The final
decision-maker, Governor
Daugaard, met with transgender
students and
their parents last week, which
he says put
a human face on the issue.
GOV. DENNIS DAUGAARD (R), South
Dakota: I
heard their personal stories.
And so I saw
things through their eyes, in
that sense.
It's certainly of great concern
to many people.
Certainly, to the opponents of
the bill, it's
of great concern. And so I don't
treat it
lightly, by any means.
APRIL BROWN: LGBT advocates at
the capitol
were pleased the governor
listened.
WOMAN: Any time you're talking,
the door's
open for change. When there's no
discussion,
you're not going forward.
APRIL BROWN: Governor Daugaard
has also spoken
to the bill's sponsors and is
reviewing testimony
and court documents before he
makes his final
decision.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
April Brown.
GWEN IFILL: Over the weekend,
several hundred
hostages of the Nigerian
Islamist group Boko
Haram were freed. It happened
during a raid
by Nigerian and Cameroonian
forces along the
border between the two African
nations.
The raid comes as the U.S.
military has moved
to increase cooperation with
regional governments
to fight the jihadist group.
Boko Haram pledged
allegiance to the Islamic State
group, or
ISIS, last year. According to
Amnesty International,
the six-year uprising has killed
more than
20,000 people. Another 2.8
million have been
forced from their homes in
Nigeria, Cameroon,
Niger, and Chad.
Boko Haram gained worldwide
infamy in 2014
after kidnapping more than 200
schoolgirls
from the town of Chibok in
Northeastern Nigeria.
That sparked a global campaign
to free the
girls, with the hashtag
#BringBackOurGirls
as a social media rallying cry.
The girls'
plight was a contributing factor
to then-President
Goodluck Jonathan's election
loss last year.
The U.S. has military personnel
operating
a new drone base in Cameroon to
provide intelligence.
And there is now discussion of
sending American
special forces near the front
lines of Nigeria's
fight against Boko Haram. They
would advise
the military in its operations.
I'm joined now by special
correspondent Nick
Schifrin. He's currently on
assignment for
us in Nairobi, Kenya, and he
reported in-depth
from Nigeria for the "NewsHour"
last year.
Nick, it's good to talk to you
again.
So, tell us what you know about
this new U.S.
engagement in Nigeria.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Yes, Gwen, good
evening.
There's a new recommendation by
the U.S. military's
top Africa Command that one to
three dozen
special operations forces troops
be deployed
to Northeastern Nigeria. This is
what the
military calls an
advise-and-assist mission.
They are towards the front
lines, but not
really on the front lines,
advising the Nigerian
military in their fight,
assisting that fight,
things like intelligence and
training those
troops. Now, this is just a
recommendation
right now. This will have to go
through the
State Department and the
Pentagon and the
White House.
But this is what the military in
Africa wants.
And it's what one military
official describes
as a national progression to a
real escalation
in what the U.S. has been doing
against Boko
Haram and helping the Nigerians.
The first
step in that is intelligence.
There's a new
drone base in nearby Northern
Cameroon. Predator
drones have been supplying the
Nigerian and
the countries all along the Lake
Chad Basin
with imagery, with intelligence,
so they can
go after Boko Haram.
That's new in the last few
months. And just
in the last few years, the U.S.
has resumed
a training mission in
Northwestern Nigeria.
That is for Nigerian special
forces far from
the front line. That's a mission
the U.S.
has really been trying to resume
after it
ended about a year ago.
And, Gwen this is in addition to
real concerted
effort diplomatically to try and
help the
Nigerians improve things like
the police.
So, this is a real escalation in
the U.S.
helping Nigeria and all the
countries fighting
Boko Haram.
GWEN IFILL: It seems like one of
the big differences
between then and now is the
presence of a
new Nigerian president,
Muhammadu Buhari.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Yes, it's an
extraordinary
difference, a real sea change of
a difference
when he was elected.
Just to give you a sense, Gwen,
of how bad
the relationship between the
U.S. and Nigeria
was before his election, at one
point, the
top U.S. military official in
Africa refused
to shake the hand of the
Nigerian chief of
army staff. That's how bad that
relationship
was.
One of the U.S. deputies was
actually locked
out of a Nigerian base at one
point, a kind
of message by the Nigerians that
they were
upset. Since then, total sea
change. Muhammadu
Buhari has not only changed the
heads of the
military, so the actual
officials doing this
work, and that relationship has
improved between
the U.S.
But he's really said to all of
his deputies,
look, the U.S. is our ally. We
need to work
with them against Boko Haram.
GWEN IFILL: Let's talk about the
strength
of Boko Haram. How strong are
they and how
extensive is their influence?
NICK SCHIFRIN: At one point,
Boko Haram was
the deadliest terrorist group in
the world.
That was by 2014, by the numbers
of people
killed.
But it's important, Gwen, to
note that that
was less about Boko Haram than
about the Nigerian
military. In some sense, Boko
Haram didn't
really have a foe on the
battlefield. Nigerian
soldiers were going out without
bullets, without
shoes, without the actual
material they needed
to fight Boko Haram.
And so Boko Haram was able to
take over land,
was able to kill so many people
because it
really wasn't encountering the
Nigerian military
or any of the militaries in the
region. Now
that's not changed not only in
Nigeria. But
Chad, Niger, Cameroon, they have
all come
together, with a little bit of
U.S. help,
to face Boko Haram.
And it's clear that, right now,
Boko Haram
is on the back foot. It cannot
seize any land
anymore, even as it still
launches suicide
attacks that are still deadly in
Nigeria.
GWEN IFILL: Finally, Nick, for
many Americans,
the last thing they heard about
this question
of Boko Haram's strength in
Nigeria has centered
around hostage-taking,
specifically about
those Chibok girls.
Where does this stand now? We
keep hearing
that thousands of hostages have
been released,
but not so much about the girls.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Yes, this is
another example
of how Boko Haram is still
around, but weakened.
Tens of thousand of people were
taken hostage
by Boko Haram at its peak.
Thousands of them
have been released by the
Nigerian military,
by the Chadian military, who are
going into
former Boko Haram strongholds.
But the girls themselves are
still missing.
President Buhari says he is
willing to negotiate
with Boko Haram to release those
girls. He's
willing to release Boko Haram
prisoners, but
he says that he hasn't found the
right Boko
Haram negotiators to do that.
So, right now, those girls are
still missing.
And, Gwen, as you know, such a
tragic part
of the story, some of those
girls or girls
in general being kidnapped are
now being used
as suicide bombers in some of
these attacks.
So, there is a still a very big
effort by
the U.S. and Nigeria to find
those girls,
but so long after those
kidnappings, there's
still no sign of them.
GWEN IFILL: Reporting for us
tonight, Nick
Schifrin. Thank you.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Thanks, Gwen.
JUDY WOODRUFF: From the very
opening of the
telecast last night, much of the
focus during
the Academy Awards was on
Hollywood's problems
with diversity.
But near the end, a notable
upset also garnered
some attention. The movie
"Spotlight" won
for best picture. In part, it is
a reminder
about the state of investigative
journalism,
and raises the question whether
it would be
more difficult to mount a
similar investigation
these days.
Jeffrey Brown has more.
MORGAN FREEMAN, Actor: The Oscar
goes to "Spotlight."
JEFFREY BROWN: The winner was
something of
a surprise: "Spotlight," a film
about one
major hometown institution, The
Boston Globe,
taking on another, the Catholic
Church.
Director Tom McCarthy:
TOM MCCARTHY, Director,
"Spotlight": We made
this film for all the
journalists who have
and continue to hold the
powerful accountable
and for the survivors, whose
courage and will
to overcome is really an
inspiration to all.
We have to do to make sure this
never happens
again.
RACHEL MCADAMS, Actress: The
numbers clearly
indicate that there were senior
clergy involved.
JEFFREY BROWN: The film recounts
how Globe
reporters and editors tracked
down cases of
sexual abuse of children by
priests, and the
cover-up by the church hierarchy
that allowed
guilty priests to stay in their
positions.
The paper's "Spotlight" team
tracked over
900 active and retired priests,
finding some
250 had molested children over
several decades.
LIEV SCHREIBER, Actor: We need
to focus on
the institution, not the
individual priests.
Practice and policy. Show me the
church manipulated
the system so that these guys
wouldn't have
to face charges. Show me they
put those same
priests back into parishes time
and time again.
Show me this was systemic, that
it came form
the top down.
JEFFREY BROWN: Actor Liev
SchreiberMD-BO /
played the Globe's editor,
Martin Baron.
LIEV SCHREIBER: When Tom sent me
the script,
I called him immediately and I
said, this
is such an amazing piece and
it's so timely
and so important that we
remember what an
asset this is to an asset to our
society and
our culture and our democracy.
JEFFREY BROWN: In 2002, as the
original investigation
was still unfolding, the
"NewsHour" visited
the Globe newsroom.
The real Martin Baron spoke of
how the case
had snowballed from a focus on
just one priest.
MARTY BARON, Executive Editor,
The Washington
Post: I thought it was an
extraordinary story.
Here was a priest who had been
accused by
130 people of having abused them
as minors.
That was just an extraordinary
number in and
of itself.
JEFFREY BROWN: Baron is now
editor of The
Washington Post.
When we spoke to him this fall
as "Spotlight"
was being released, he said he
hoped the film
could also raise awareness of
the continuing
need for strong investigative
journalism
MARTY BARON: Well, we're a
profession that's
under tremendous pressure, a lot
of financial
pressure. So, clearly, it's
going to be more
difficult, given that there are
fewer resources
to do it. This is very expensive
work to do.
And yet we have to commit
ourselves to doing
it. Somebody needs to hold
powerful institutions
and individuals accountable, and
we're the
ones who have that particular
role in our
society.
JEFFREY BROWN: The Boston
Globe's "Spotlight"
unit won a Pulitzer Prize for
its coverage.
To add to Martin Baron's point
about economic
pressures, since 2003, newspaper
staffs have
declined by 40 percent. In the
same period,
though, new models for
investigative journalism
are being tried, in some cases
with good success.
We're joined now by Margaret
Sullivan, outgoing
public editor for The New York
Times. She
will soon be joining The
Washington Post as
its media columnist. And Steve
Engelberg,
the editor in chief of
ProPublica, a nonprofit
news organization that has won
numerous awards
for its investigative work.
Welcome, both, to you.
Margaret Sullivan, let me start
with you.
You wrote recently that -- quote
-- "The film
'Spotlight' is powerful and
moving, but it
raises troubling questions about
the state
of local investigative reporting
today and
its future."
What -- you thought that even as
you were
watching the movie. What was
troubling?
MARGARET SULLIVAN, The New York
Times: Well,
it's very troubling to me,
because I'm a former
editor of a regional newspaper,
and I watch
these issues carefully.
Staff numbers are way down. Many
papers have
to or have felt they have had to
dismantle
their investigative teams. And
the resources
just aren't there that were
there even 10
years ago. It's really
troubling.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, Steve
Engelberg, the economics
of the business are clearly one
issue. What
about leadership and audience
appetite? How
do they play in?
STEPHEN ENGELBERG, Editor in
Chief, ProPublica:
Well, it's very interesting,
because right
at this very minute, we have the
best investigative
reporting tools we have ever had
in the Internet.
It's amazing what we can now
access in terms
of information. And people are
reading more.
The problem we have got is that
people aren't
willing to pay for it. And
that's a big problem.
And, as Margaret says, it's a
particularly
acute problem outside the major
cities of
the United States, and even in
some of those
major cities, where newspapers
are at 50 percent
or less of their previous size.
That's the
problem. It's an economic
problem.
From the perspective of the
craft, it's a
great time to be an
investigative reporter.
JEFFREY BROWN: But flesh that
out a little
bit. So, it's really a
double-edged sword
of technology, right, about
digital technology
allows a certain kind of more
reporting and
more dissemination, but you're
saying the
economics make it harder.
STEPHEN ENGELBERG: Exactly,
because people
feel on the Internet that
content ought to
be free.
And so newspapers which made
money by charging
for subscription and ads find
their ad revenues
severely pitched and
subscription revenues
evaporating. And in the face of
that, people
want to go online and read this
wonderful
content for free. That is not a
model that
works.
On the other side of it, though,
it is literally
amazing. I started in the
business when they
still had typewriters, believe
it or not,
and it's literally amazing these
days what
you can access in terms of data,
in terms
of journal articles,
information, finding
people.
Everything you want to do as an
investigative
reporter is just enhanced by the
current technology.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, so,
Margaret Sullivan,
if I ask you, is "Spotlight"
possible today,
sounds like the answer is in
some cases yes,
but in a lot of cases no.
MARGARET SULLIVAN: I think it is
still possible
in most places.
But I think that the will to do
this kind
of work is weakening somewhat,
and it has
to be beefed up. "Spotlight" is
such an inspiring
movie, that I'm hopeful that it
will cause
owners and editors and
publishers to realize
just how important this work is
and to fund
it and to get behind it.
JEFFREY BROWN: Tell us, what
kind of stories
do you fear are being missed
even today?
MARGARET SULLIVAN: Well, it's
always hard
to know what's being missed...
JEFFREY BROWN: Of course.
MARGARET SULLIVAN: ... because
you don't know
it until you read it in the
paper or hear
it or watch it.
But the stories that are really
difficult
to do are the ones that are so
time-consuming.
And you could tell from
"Spotlight" that people
were knocking on doors and they
were going
over lists and they were
agonizing about how
to nail it down.
And those kind of things are
very expensive
and they take time. But it is
the stories
about holding powerful people
and institutions
accountable that really, really
matter.
JEFFREY BROWN: Steve Engelberg,
you were talking
about the new possibilities by
digital technology,
by new models. And you work at
one of those
new models for investigative
journalism. It's
a nonprofit model.
Tell us about what that allows
you to do,
avoiding the advertising, for
example, but
also the challenges that you
face because
of it.
STEPHEN ENGELBERG: Well, the
model doesn't
really change what you can do.
In the old days, you had
advertiser who gave
a lot of money. And, of course,
you know,
they were investing in a
product, and you
could be aware of that or not as
you so chose.
Great newspapers always cut off
the business
side from the journalism side.
Today, we have
donors. It's the same thing. We
have a wall
between the people who give and
foundations
and so on and the content
itself.
I did want to mention, by the
way, your question,
because I think we can go to
this. Pulitzer
Prize a couple of years ago was
won by "The
Los Angeles Times" about a
little town called
Bell, California, where the city
council voted
the city manager and the
leadership salaries
of over a million dollars a year
and 109 vacation
days each.
So, you asked the question, what
kind of stories
would missed because no
journalists are around?
That's a pretty basic story.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, Margaret
Sullivan, what
about these new models that you
see happening
for investigative journalism?
Where are there
good things happening?
MARGARET SULLIVAN: Well, they
are springing
up over all the country.
ProPublica, of which Steve is
the chief editor,
is a real leader. But there are
many in different
communities. And there's a
question of whether
they can endure, whether they
can work with
their small staffs. The Texas
Tribune is a
great example of a local digital
startup that
does a lot of good work. So,
they're happening.
I guess it's just a matter of
whether they're
ultimately going to be
sustainable.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, Steve
Engelberg, a last
brief word from you. Just
thinking about the
movie last night and an Oscar
victory, does
that give you hope? What does
your gut tell
you about any difference it
might make?
STEPHEN ENGELBERG: I think the
movie's going
to inspire more people.
I have been talking on
journalism schools,
at campuses lately, and people
who have seen
that movie find it very
inspiring, as do I.
I think it's just a great
example of what
we can do when journalists do
the job that
they need to do in our society.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, Steve
Engelberg,
Margaret Sullivan, thank you
both very much.
MARGARET SULLIVAN: Thank you.
STEPHEN ENGELBERG: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
online: One
of our Making Sense columnists
says don't
be fooled by sunny forecasts of
the U.S. economy.
Economics professor John Komlos
warns that
the unemployment rate can be
deceiving. And
he outlines some of the
statistics he says
we should really be paying
attention to.
That's on our home page, on our
Web site,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's the
"NewsHour" for
tonight.
Join us tomorrow for our special
coverage
of the Super Tuesday primaries,
as voters
head to the polls in 12 states.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.